PREFACE

It is with great pleasure that we present the current volume of papers
accepted for presentation at the Ninth International Workshop on Tree
Adjoining Grammar and Related Formalisms (TAG+9). We would like to
acknowledge the authors who submitted to TAG+9 and the members of the
program commitee who reviewed the submissions; this meeting would not
be possible without their hard work. We would like to thank
our invited speakers, Uwe M\"{o}nnich and Stuart Shieber, for their
participation and offering support to this meeting.

A valuable addition to the TAG+9 meeting is the tutorial program on
various aspects of TAG, which was organized by Laura Kallmeyer. The
tutorial features Eric de la Clergerie, Denys Duchier, Robert Frank
and Maribel Romero. We would like to acknowledge their effort in
fostering new interest in TAG and more generally in formal research
into natural language.

Funding for TAG+9 was provided by the German Research Foundation
(DFG). Laura Kallmeyer was not only responsible for securing this
funding, but also was in charge of hosting TAG+9 at the University of
T\"{u}bingen. Together with Timm Lichte and Wolfgang Maier, Laura
Kallmeyer handled the local organisation of the meeting and the
preparation of the proceedings. Their contributions to TAG+9 have been
invaluable.

As at previous TAG+ workshops, the topics addressed by the
presentations belong to diverse areas of research: mathematics of
grammar formalisms and parsing, the syntax and semantics of natural
languages, compact grammar representations and grammar engineering,
and the relation between TAG and other grammar formalisms. By bringing
together these different topics under the common theme of Tree
Adjoining Grammars, the workshop promises to be a venue for
interesting discussion of the latest research in this area.

TAG+9 received submissions from all over the world. We were able to
accept 22 out of the 29 abstract submissions to the workshop.  This
volume contains the 22 research papers that will be presented at
TAG+9. They are divided into two parts; the first part covering the 11
papers that are to be deliverd in oral presentations and the second
part covering the 11 papers that are to be presented as posters.

Claire Gardent and Anoop Sarkar
Program co-Chairs for TAG+9
